---
marp: true
size: 16:9 
paginate: true
#footer: Week 10.02
---

# GEOG 4/5/7 9073: Environmental Analysis in R

## 

## Week 10.02: Raster processing (Wildcard Thursday)

### Dr. Bitterman

## 

---

# Today's schedule

- Open discussion
- A note on attendance
- Raster activity

---

## Anything to discuss? Questions?

---

## A note on attendance

---

# Today's task: a real world example of raster processing

You'll be using resources from your readings and the code we worked through last class.

In the github repo:

```
./data/wildcard_thursday/erie_raster_ex/
```

Here you will find:
1. weekly composites of cyanobacteria blooms in Lake Erie
2. a set of shapefiles representing areas of interest within Lake Erie
3. a metadata file

---

# Tasks (in groups)

1. Write a function that takes a raster image and calculates the total size of the cyanobacteria blooms
2. Create a binary raster that shows where cyanobacteria were present in the Sept 20-26th image, but NOT in the August 16-22nd image.
3. Using the areas of interest, for which dates was the bloom in Sandusky Bay the "worst"? I leave you define "worst"
4. Using raster algebra and a local operation, write a function that transforms the raster from its original (DN) values to the index values.
5. What combination of area-of-interest AND date(s) did a bloom take up the greatest portion of that area-of-interest. Bonus points if you write a script/function(s) to automate



---

## For NEXT week

- Readings posted on Canvas (Lovelace ch 9)
- DO THE READINGS AND PRACTICE. WE WILL BE DOING IN-CLASS GROUP ACTIVITIES
- Work on your projects

